
1. Mad Libs Generator
One of the best ideas to start experimenting you hands-on python projects for students is working on Mad Libs Generator. This is the perfect project for beginners who are just starting out with software development. Primarily focused on strings, variables, and concatenation, this project will teach you how to manipulate user-inputted data. The program design is such that it will ask users to enter a series of inputs that will be considered as a Mad Lib.

The input could be anything, an adjective, a noun, a pronoun, etc. Once all the inputs are entered, the application will take the data and arrange the inputs into a story template form. Sound fun, right?

2. Number Guessing
This is a simple yet exciting idea. You can even call it a mini-game. Make a program in which the computer randomly chooses a number between 1 to 10, 1 to 100, or any range. Then give users a hint to guess the number. Every time the user guesses wrong, he gets another clue, and his score gets reduced. The clue can be multiples, divisible, greater or smaller, or a combination of all.

You will also need functions to compare the inputted number with the guessed number, to compute the difference between the two, and to check whether an actual number was inputted or not.

3. Text-based Adventure Game
This is a basic version of the Adventure game. It is completely text-based. In this version of the game, users can move about through different rooms within a single setting, and based on the user input, it will provide descriptions for each room.

Movement direction is crucial here – you must create walls and set the directions in which the users can move through the rooms, set movement restrictions, and also include a tracker that can track how far a user has walked or moved in the game. Mentioning Python projects can help your resume look much more interesting than others.

4. Dice Rolling Simulator


As the name of the program suggests, we will be imitating a rolling dice. The program will generate a random number each dice the program runs, and the users can use the dice repeatedly for as long as he wants.  When the user rolls the dice, the program will generate a random number between 1 and 6 (as on a standard dice).

The number will then be displayed to the user. It will also ask users if they would like to roll the dice again. The program should also include a function that can randomly grab a number within 1 to 6 and print it. This beginner-level project will help build a strong foundation for fundamental programming concepts.

5. Hangman
This is more of a “guess the word” game. The core concepts you have to use while developing this project are variables, random, integer, strings, char, input and output, and boolean. In the game, users have to enter letter guesses, and each user will have a limited number of guesses (a counter variable is needed for limiting the guesses).

You can create a pre-organized list of words that users can grab words from. Also, you must include specific functions to check whether or not a user has entered a single letter or if the input letter is in the hidden word, to if the user has actually inputted a single letter, and to print the correct outcomes (letters).

6. Contact Book


This is an excellent python project idea for beginners. Everyone uses a contact book to save contact details, including name, address, phone number, and even email address. This is a command-line project where you will design a contact book application that users can use to save and find contact details. The application should also allow users to update contact information, delete contacts, and list saved contacts. The SQLite database is the ideal platform for saving contacts. 

7. Email Slicer
This is a convenient program that has a lot of use in the future. The program helps get you the username and domain name from an email address. You can even customize the application and send a message to the host with this information.

8. Binary search algorithm
Have you ever heard the proverb, “finding a needle in a haystack.” This program is designed to do just that- by using a binary search algorithm. You can create a list of random numbers between 0 to 100, with every succeeding number having a difference of 2 between them.

When the user inputs a random number, the program will check if that number is included in the list. It will do so by creating two halves of the list. If the program finds the number in the first half of the list, it will eliminate the other half and vice versa. The search will continue until the program finds the number input of the user or until the subarray size becomes 0 (this means that the number is not in the list). This python project idea will help you create an implement an algorithm that searches for an element in a list. 

9. Desktop Notifier App
Have you ever wondered how notifications work? This small python project idea will throw some light on this. The desktop notifier apps run on your system and send you a piece of information after a fixed interval of time. We suggest you use libraries such as notify2, requests, etc. to build such a program.

10. Python Story Generator
This is a fun but exciting program which will work wonders with kids. In a nutshell, the program will ask users for inputs such as the name of a place, action, etc. and then build a story around the data. The story will be the same always but with little variation with the input.

11. YouTube video downloader
One of the best ideas to start experimenting you hands-on python projects for students is working on YouTube video downloader. More than a billion people watch YouTube every month. Sometimes there are videos we like to download permanently. YouTube doesn’t give you that option, but you can create an app with a simple UI and the ability to download YouTube videos in different formats and video quality. This project looks tough, but it is straightforward when you start working on it.

12. Python Website Blocker
When we surf the internet, many unwanted websites keep showing up. You can build a program that blocks certain websites from opening. This program is beneficial for students who want to study without any social media distractions.

13. Spin a Yarn
Things get more interesting here since strings are infinitely more complex to play with at the beginning.

The program first prompts the user to enter a series of inputs. These can be an adjective, a preposition, a proper noun, etc. Once all the inputs are in place, they are placed in a premade story template using concatenation. In the end, the full story is printed out to read some misintended madness!

14. What’s the word?
This name focuses on the user having to guess the randomly generated word. You can create a list from which the word would have to be guessed and also set a cap on the number of guesses allowed.

After this, you can create the rules yourself! When the user inputs the word, you can indicate whether the alphabet written appears in this particular position or not. You will need a function to check if the user is inputting alphabets or numbers and to display error messages appropriately.

15. Rock, Paper, Scissors
If you are tired of having no playmate, then a 5-minute stint of rock, paper, scissors with the computer and designed by you, yourself will improve your mood.

We again use the random function here. You make a move first and then the program makes one. To indicate the move, you can either use a single alphabet or input an entire string. A function will have to be set up to check the validity of the move.

Using another function, the winner of that round is decided. You can then either give an option of playing again or decide a pre-determined number of moves in advance. A scorekeeping function will also have to be created which will return the winner at the end.

16. Leap it!
In this program, you input a year and check whether it is a leap year or not. For this, you’ll have to create a function that recognizes the pattern of leap years and can try fitting the inputted year into the pattern. In the end, you can print the result using a boolean expression.

17. Find out, Fibonacci!
You input a number and the function created checks whether the number belongs to the Fibonacci sequence or not. The underlying workings are similar to the above ‘Leap it!’ program.

One common theme in all the above projects is that they will help you to get your basics right. You will be the developer and the bug fixer. Not to mention, you’ll be closing working with creating and implementing a variety of functions along with working with variables, strings, integers, operators, etc. Just like 2 + 2 is the building block of your mathematics knowledge, so are these concepts, and learning about them in a fun way through building projects will help to understand and retain them more.

These are some of the most straightforward Python project ideas for you to work on. Once you finish these, let’s move to the next level.

Read: Machine Learning Project Ideas For Beginners

Python Project Ideas: Intermediate Level
18. Calculator
Although there isn’t much use of a calculator, however, building your graphical UI calculator will make you familiar with a library like Tkinter in which you can create buttons to perform different operations and display results on a screen.

19. Countdown Clock and Timer
It is another utility app in which the user can set a timer, and the app notifies you when time is up.

20. Random Password Generator
Creating a strong password and remembering it is a tedious task. You can build a program that intakes some words from the user and then generates a random password using those words. The user can remember the password with the help of the words he gave as an input.

21. Random Wikipedia Article
This is a complicated yet straightforward program. The program searches Wikipedia and fetches a random article. Then it asks the user if he wants to read that article or not. If the answer is yes, the material is shown; otherwise, another random report is presented.

22. Reddit Bot
This is one of the excellent python project ideas for beginners. Reddit is a handy platform, and many people want to be online as much as they can. You can program a bot that monitors subreddits and reports whenever they find something useful. It will save Redditors a lot of time and provide helpful information with it.

23. Python Command-Line Application
Python is known for building outstanding command-line applications. You can create your program, which can help you send emails to other people. The program will ask your credentials and the content of the email, then send the data using your created command line.

24. Alarm Clock
This is one of the interesting python project ideas. People all across the globe use alarm clock applications. It is quite a simple Command Line Interface (CLI) Python application for an intermediate-level developer. However, this project isn’t your run-of-the-mill alarm clock. In this application, you can input YouTube links in a text file and design the application to read the file. If you set a particular time in the alarm clock, it will pick a random YouTube link from the text file and play the YouTube video.

25. Tic-Tac-Toe
We all have fond memories of playing Tic-Tac-Toe with our friends in school, don’t we? It is one of the most fun games you can play anywhere – all you need is a pen and paper! Usually, two players can play Tic-Tac-Toe at a time. The players create a 3×3 square grid.

While the first player puts “X” in any one of the squares, and the second player will put an “O” in any square. This process will continue until all the squares are filled with each player putting X and O alternatively. The player who succeeds in creating a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal with three consecutive X or O on the grid wins.

You can use the Pygame library for building this project. Pygame is loaded with all the modules you need for computer graphics and sound.

26. Steganography
Steganography is the art of hiding a secret message in another form of media, for example, hiding a coded message in an image or video. You can create a program that protects messages inside pictures for you.

27. Currency converter


This is a simple GUI application that you can develop using Python. As you can guess by the name, you will build a currency converter that can convert currencies from one unit to another, for example, converting Indian rupee into pound or euro.

The design of this application will be straightforward – the main focus should be the primary function, that is, converting currency units from one to another. You can use Tkinter, the standard Python interface to the Tk GUI toolkit shipped along with Python.

28. Post-it Notes
Post-it notes are an excellent way to note down trivial chores so that you don’t forget to do them. In this project, we’ll make a virtual version of the physical, adhesive post-it notes. The main goal of building this application is to allow users to carry their post-it notes wherever they go (since it is on a digital platform).

The application should have an option for account creation, different layouts for post-it notes, and a categorization feature to allow users to segment their notes. You can consider using Django for this project since it has an in-built user authentication feature.

29. Site Connectivity Checker
The job of a site connectivity checker is to visit a URL and display the status of that URL, that is, whether or not it is a live URL. Usually, site connectivity checkers visit URLs at regular intervals and return the results each time. This project will work on the same lines – it will check the live status of URLs.

You must design the code for this application from scratch. As for your connections, you can either opt for TCP or ICMP. You can use click, docopt, or argparse frameworks for adding commands that will enable users to add and delete URLs from the list of URLs they want to check. 

30. Directory Tree Generator
A Directory Tree Generator lets you visualize the relationship between files and directories, thereby making it easier to understand the positioning of files and directories. For this project, you can use os library to list the files and directories within a specific directory. Again, docopt or argparse frameworks are excellent tools for the project. 

Read: Python Developer Salary in India

These are some intermediate Python project ideas on which you can work. If you still like to test your knowledge and take on some tough projects

Python Project Ideas: Advanced Level
31. Speed Typing Test


Let’s start advanced python project ideas for beginners. Do you remember the old typing test game which was used in Windows XP and before? You can create a similar program that tests your typing speed. First, you need to create a UI using a library like Tkinter. Then create a fun typing test that displays the user speed, accuracy and words per minute in the end. You can also find source code for the program online.

32. Content Aggregator
The internet is filled with websites, articles and information. When we want to find something, it is tough to go through each of them. For this use, you can create a content aggregator that automatically searches popular websites and looks for relevant content and then complies with all the content and lets the user choose which content they want. It is very much like Google but unbiased. And this is the perfect idea for your next python project!

33. Bulk File Rename/ Image Resize Application
This is an advanced project which needs you to be well-versed in Machine Learning. We will begin by teaching the program on how to pre-process data, then perform a few resize and rename images tasks. As the program starts learning, it can handle bulk functions at once.

34. Python File Explorer
This is a significant project as it will test your knowledge on the various concepts of Python. You need to build an app that anyone uses to explore the files in their system. You can also add features like searching and copy-paste. Tkinter is a commendable choice for this project as it makes the development of GUI applications fast and easy.

To create the Python File Explorer using Tkinter, you have to import the filedialog module from Tkinter. This module is designed for opening files and directories and saving them.

35. Plagiarism Checker
Content writing is one of the most prolific online businesses. The market lacks a free tool that can be used to check for plagiarism in documents. You can use a natural language processing library along with the Google search API to create a program that searches the first few pages of Google and checks for plagiarism.

36. Web Crawler
A web crawler is an automated program script that surfs the internet and stores the content of a particular webpage. A web crawler is especially useful to find up-to-date information. You will need to use a multi-thread concept for such a program. You can use Python’s request module to make the crawler bot, or you can use Scrapy. It is Python’s open-source web crawling framework explicitly designed for web scraping and extracting data by using APIs.

37. Music Player
Everyone likes listening to music; you can also create your music player app. Other than playing music, your program can explore your file directories and search for music. The creative program you might face is creating an interactive interface that can be used by regular users.

The app will have a neat interface that will allow users to browse through tracks, increase/decrease volume, display the name of the song, artist, album. This project will mainly involve the basics of Python programming, database management, algorithm construction, and data processing

38. Price Comparison Extension
This can be an interesting and useful python project idea. Just like Trivago, you can create a program that searches a few notable websites for the price of a product and then show you the best deal. It is a convenient program, as many businesses started on this small program. You can use this extension for groceries, stationery, etc.

39. Expense Tracker
As you can guess by the name, an expense tracker is a software application that lets you keep track of your expenses, and even analyze the expenses. In this project, you will build a simple expense tracker that can keep track of the user’s expenses.

The application should also be able to perform statistical analysis to give accurate insights to users on their expenses so that they can plan their expenses better. You can use PySimpleGUI to create the interface for this application, and even Python libraries like Pandas and Matplotlib can be handy tools for the project.

40. Regex Query Tool
Regular search tools often fail to produce the desired results for specific queries. In such events, what you need is a Regex Query Tool. In simple words, a regex is a set of strings, which means that when you enter a query in this tool, it will check the validity of your query.

If the regex can match patterns in the text query entered by the user, it notifies the user by highlighting all the matching patterns. A Regex Query Tool allows users to quickly check the validity of their regex strings on the Web, thereby making the search process much easier. Python’s re library is the perfect tool for running the query strings on the user-inputted text.

41. Instagram Photo Downloader


This would be an app that automatically downloads all the Instagram images of your friends. It is quite similar to the above command line app as this app will use your credentials to open your account and then look for your friend’s ID and download their photos. This app would be handy when people want to delete pages and save just the images.

42. Quiz Application
This is one of the interesting python project ideas to create. This is a standard quiz application that presents a set of carefully curated questions to the users (a questionnaire), allows them to answer the same, and displays the correct answer if they are wrong. Each test will display the final score of the user. The application will have an account creation option, wherein some users can be appointed as Admins.

These Admins can create tests for other users. In this way, the tests and quizzes continue to be updated. This application requires a database to store all the questions, answers, and scores of the users. You can also include additional features like timers for tests.


